BOSNIAN JOURNAL OF
BASIC MEDICAL SCIENCES REVIEW ARTICLE WWW.BJBMS.ORG
Targeted immunotherapy with a checkpoint inhibitor
in combination with chemotherapy: A new clinical
paradigm in the treatment of triple-negative breast cancer
Farhan S. Cyprian1, Saghir Akhtar1, Zoran Gatalica2, Semir Vranic1*
1College of Medicine, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar, 2Caris Life Sciences, Phoenix, Arizona, United States of America
ABSTRACT
The treatment of several solid and hematologic malignancies with immune checkpoint inhibitors (against programmed death receptor-1/
ligand-1 [PD-1/PD-L1]) has dramatically changed the cancer treatment paradigm. However, no checkpoint inhibitors were previously
approved for the treatment of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), a difficult-to-treat disease with a high unmet therapeutic need. Based on
IMpassion130 clinical trial (NCT02425891), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has recently granted an accelerated approval for atezoli-
zumab (TECENTRIQ), a monoclonal antibody drug targeting PD-L1, plus chemotherapy (Abraxane; nab-Paclitaxel) for the treatment of
adults with PD-L1-positive, unresectable, locally advanced or metastatic TNBC. The FDA has also approved the Ventana diagnostic antibody
SP142 as a companion test for selecting TNBC patients for treatment with atezolizumab. In the present review, we briefly discuss the impor-
tance of this breakthrough as the first cancer immunotherapy regimen to be approved for the management of breast cancer.
KEY WORDS: Breast cancer; triple-negative breast cancer; immune checkpoint inhibitors; predictive biomarkers; PD-L1
DOI:  Bosn J Basic Med Sci. 2019;19(3):227-233. © 2019 ABMSFBIH
REVIEW microsatellite instable (MSI-H) colorectal, cervical, hepato-
cellular and Merkel cell carcinoma, as well as in malignant
Recent advances in the development of cancer immuno- melanoma (both pediatric and adult) and classical Hodgkin’s
therapy using immune checkpoint inhibitors against either lymphoma [6,7]. In addition, an anti-PD-1 agent pembroli-
programmed death receptor-1 (PD-1) or its ligand PD-L1 have rev- zumab has been approved for all solid MSI-H cancers regard-
olutionized treatment of several solid tumors [1-4]. The interaction less the histotype (“tumor agnostic approach”) [7-10].
between PD-1 on T-cells and its ligands PD-L1 and PD-L2 on can- Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a complex and highly
cer cells promotes T-cell exhaustion and conversion of T effector aggressive subtype of breast cancer lacking estrogen (ER), progester-
cells to immunosuppressive T regulatory (Treg) cells (Figure 1) . one (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)
Immune checkpoint inhibitors (against either PD-1 or PD-L1) receptors, thereby making it difficult to treat . It carries the
block the suppressor PD-1/PD-L1 axis contributing to the reacti- highest metastatic potential and has the poorest clinical outcome
vation of cytotoxic T effector cells and consequently enhancing among all the subtypes of breast cancer . Due to the advances
the anticancer activity of the immune system (Figure 1) . in molecular characterization of TNBC, various novel therapeutic
Stunning successes of monoclonal antibody-based immune targets including poly ADP-ribose polymerase-1 (PARP-1) inhibi-
checkpoint inhibitors against PD-1/PD-L1 (e.g., nivolumab, tors, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, immune checkpoints, anti-andro-
pembrolizumab, atezolizumab, avelumab, durvalumab, and gens, and epigenetic targets have come into focus .
ipilimumab) have been achieved in various cancers . These Although breast cancer has been initially considered a
include non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC), renal, blad- “non-immunogenic” cancer, numerous studies have now
der, head and neck, gastric/gastroesophageal junction (GEJ), shown PD-L1 expression in both cancer and inflammatory
cells (tumor infiltrating lymphocytes [TILs]). PD-L1 positivity
*Corresponding author:
in cancer or inflammatory cells has been reported across the
Semir Vranic, College of Medicine, Qatar University, PO Box 2713, Doha,
Qatar. Phone: +974 4403 7873. breast cancer histotypes [12-26]. In particular, ER-negative
E-mail: semir.vranic@gmail.com/svranic@qu.edu.qa
breast cancers (TNBC and HER2 positive) have been shown
Submitted: 25 March 2019 / Accepted: 26 March 2019 to be “immunogenic” and potentially amenable for the trials
227
Farhan S. Cyprian, et al.: Atezolizumab in triple-negative breast cancer
with anti-PD-1/PD-L1 agents [12,16,17,20,26-35]. TNBC is or TPS <50%) but rather focal or patchy and limited to a small
thought to have relatively high PD-L1 expression, predom- proportion of cancer cells .
inantly in inflammatory (immune) cells and occasionally There are numerous ongoing clinical trials with immune
in cancer cells (Figure 2A and B) [14,16-18,20,29-31,36-39]. checkpoint inhibitors combined with other treatment modali-
A recent systematic review of Zhang et al. , based on ties in breast cancer . Of note has been atezolizumab which
analysis >2500 breast cancers, revealed PD-L1 positivity in selectively targets PD-L1 to prevent interaction with the recep-
the range 21-56% (Table 1). In such studies, the tumor propor- tors PD-1 and B7-1 (a costimulatory cell-surface protein) to
tion score (TPS) is defined as “the percentage of viable tumor reverse T-cell suppression. It had previously been approved as
cells showing partial or complete membrane staining (≥1+) a single-agent for the treatment of metastatic urothelial/blad-
relative to all viable tumor cells present in the sample (pos- der carcinoma and non–small-cell lung cancer [42,43]. This
itive and negative)”, source:  monoclonal antibody drug is clinically effective and has a good
cdrh_docs/pdf15/p150013b.pdf, accessed: March 10, 2019). safety profile in patients with other solid tumors , so it was a
It is noteworthy that, in most PD-L1-positive breast cancers, good candidate for potential use in the management of patients
PD-L1 expression is not diffuse (>50% of positive cancer cells with TNBC. The most remarkable results have been recently
FIGURE 1. The possible mechanism of action of anti-programmed death receptor-1/ligand-1 (PD-1/PD-L1) drugs (e.g., atezolizumab)
and nab-paclitaxel in metastatic triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). (i) Metastatic breast cancers are dynamic environments undergo-
ing proliferation and apoptosis along with immune cell infiltration. Breast cancers are heterogeneous populations which may or may
not (e.g., TNBC) be influenced by ERBB2/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) and/or nuclear estrogen receptor (ER) and
progesterone receptor (PR) signaling (a). Apoptotic tumor cells are phagocytosed, and tumor-specific antigens are expressed on the
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules by tumor-infiltrating antigen presenting cells (APC) that may activate antigen-spe-
cific cytotoxic T cell (CTL) responses by engaging their T cell receptors. Costimulatory signals through B7 on APCs and CD28 on T cells
are necessary for CTL differentiation and proliferation. T cells express PD-L1 and its receptor PD-1. The interaction of PD-L1 with B7.1
suppresses T cell differentiation into CTL (b). Metastatic TNBC expresses PD-L1 in abundance. The engagement of PD-L1 with PD-1 blocks
CTL effector function allowing unchecked tumor progression (c). (ii) Metastatic TNBC positive for PD-L1 respond to combination therapy
with atezolizumab (monoclonal anti-PD-L1 antibody) and Abraxane (nab-paclitaxel) (a). Abraxane enhances expression of tumor-specific
antigens and induction of apoptosis (G2/M phase arrest), thereby facilitating antigen presentation via APCs (b). APCs are activated via
nab-paclitaxel and enhance toll-like receptor (TLR) expression contributing to efficient antigen presentation as well as costimulation by
B7 family (c). Suppressive signal in activating T cells is inhibited as atezolizumab blocks the interaction of PD-L1 with B7.1. Thus augment-
ing signal induction for activation, differentiation, and proliferation of tumor-specific CTL clones (d). Metastatic TNBC expresses PD-L1
in abundance. Disrupting the engagement of PD-L1 with its receptor PD-1 by anti-PD-L1 antibody allows CTLs to secrete perforins that
make holes in the target cell membrane allowing granzymes to enter and induce caspase-dependent apoptosis of these aggressive
cancers (e).
228
Farhan S. Cyprian, et al.: Atezolizumab in triple-negative breast cancer
A B
FIGURE 2. Programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1) as a biomarker for triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). (A) Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E)
slide of the high-grade, TNBC not otherwise specified (NOS) with abundant tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) [×10]; (B) TILs were
strongly positive for PD-L1 by immunohistochemistry (clone SP142, Ventana). Note the lack of PD-L1 expression in the cancer cells (×10).
TABLE 1. A list of the available diagnostic anti-PD-L1 antibodies with taxane-based chemotherapy that inhibits mitosis was that
and their status in regards to the FDA approval
it may enhance tumor-antigen release and antitumor responses
Antibody (Manufacturer)  FDA status Cancer subtype to immune checkpoint inhibition. Additionally, solvent-free
22c3 (Dako Agilent) Companion NSCLC
taxanes might also activate toll-like receptors and promote
diagnostics* Bladder cancer
Cervical cancer dendritic cell activity (Figure 1) [45,46].
Gastric and GEJ
In the IMpassion130 trial, prior to treating patients with
cancer
atezolizumab, tumor samples were centrally assessed by immu-
SP142 (Ventana) Companion Bladder cancer
diagnostics Breast cancer nohistochemistry for the presence of PD-L1 expression (SP142
Complementary NSCLC
clone, Ventana). PD-L1 expression was assessed in tumor-infil-
diagnostics**
SP263 (Ventana) Complementary Bladder cancer trating (immune) cells using two-tier system: “a percentage of
diagnostics tumor area” <1% (=PD-L1 negative) or ≥1% (=PD-L1 positive). The
28-8 (Dako Agilent) Complementary NSCLC
study revealed that the patients whose cancers were positive for
diagnostics Bladder cancer
Melanoma PD-L1 (~41%) and received atezolizumab did significantly better
HNSCC
than those treated with nab-paclitaxel: Median progression-free
Bladder cancer
survival (PFS) was 7.2 months with atezolizumab compared
73-10 (Dako Agilent/Merck) Not approved Merkel cell
carcinoma with 5.5 months of the patients treated with placebo-nab-pacli-
*Companion diagnostics: “A medical device, often an in vitro device, taxel only. In the PD-L1-positive subgroup, the response rate was
which provides information that is essential for the safe and effective use
~59% with atezolizumab–nab-paclitaxel in comparison with
of a corresponding drug or biological product.” (Source: FDA, accessed
January 25, 2019), **Complementary diagnostics: “A test that aids in the ~43% in the placebo–nab-paclitaxel subgroup. Notably, 10% of
benefit–risk decision–making about the use of the therapeutic product,
the patients in the atezolizumab–nab-paclitaxel group achieved
where the difference in benefit–risk is clinically meaningful” (Sources:
ASCO/American Society of Clinical Oncology/, 2016 and . a complete response as compared with only ~1% of those in the
NSCLC: Non-small cell lung cancer; GEJ cancer: Gastroesophageal cancer;
placebo–nab-paclitaxel group . Importantly, the atezoli-
HNSCC: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma; FDA: Food and Drug
Administration zumab plus nab-paclitaxel combination group yielded no new
safety concerns as the safety profile appeared consistent with
the known profiles of each component drug. Indeed, the most
achieved in the clinical trial IMpassion130 (NCT02425891) .
common side effects with the combined treatment were hair
This study led the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to
grant accelerated approval for atezolizumab (TECENTRIQ, loss, fatigue, tingling or numbness in the hands and feet, nausea
and vomiting, diarrhea, anemia, constipation, cough, headache,
anti-PD-L1 agent) in combination with chemotherapy using a
neutropenia, and reduced appetite, which were present among
solvent-free, nanoparticle albumin-bound (nab) formulation
of paclitaxel (nab-Paclitaxel; Abraxane) for the treatment of 20% or more of patients.
One of the important findings in the IMpassion130 trial is
patients with TNBC (date of approval: March 8, 2019). The
the efficiency of combined therapy (immunotherapy + conven-
approval was based on the randomized trial involving 902
tional chemotherapy). The combined treatment has its rationale
TNBC patients with unresectable, locally advanced, and/or
at the molecular level as illustrated in the case of breast cancer
metastatic TNBC without prior treatment for the metastatic
in Figure 1. This approach has also been clinically verified to
disease. Patients were randomized (1:1) to receive atezolizumab
be successful in other cancers like NSCLC. Thus, the FDA in
plus chemotherapy with Abraxanevs. placebo plus Abraxane.
September 2017 approved the first combination of chemotherapy
The possible rationale for combining the checkpoint inhibitor
229
Farhan S. Cyprian, et al.: Atezolizumab in triple-negative breast cancer
and immunotherapy for patients with metastatic, non-squamous the use of checkpoint inhibitors together with conventional che-
NSCLC. The approval included pembrolizumab (KEYTRUDA) motherapy as a novel clinical paradigm for the treatment of oth-
in combination with pemetrexed and carboplatin. The approval erwise difficult-to-treat cancers.
was based on results obtained in the KEYNOTE-021 Phase 2 It is clinically important to identify patients who are likely
clinical trial that demonstrated that non-squamous NSCLC to respond to checkpoint inhibitor-based immunotherapy.
patients treated with the combination therapy exhibited a 55% Although a quite difficult task given the complex tumor micro-
therapeutic response rate in comparison with 29% with chemo- environment and interactions between the cancer and various
therapy alone . A recent update on this study (24 months fol- immune cells such as T-lymphocytes, B-lymphocytes, den-
low-up) confirmed the initial data with significant improvements dritic, and antigen-presenting cells (Figure 1), several biomark-
in PFS and objective response rate (~57% in combined group vs. ers have nonetheless been identified to reliably predict the
30% in chemotherapy group) in the patients treated with com- effectiveness of the anti-PD-1/PD-L1 checkpoint inhibitors in
bined immunotherapy (pembrolizumab)-chemotherapy (peme- cancer patients. These include PD-L1 status (the target protein/
trexed-carboplatin) . More recently, the FDA on March 18, antigen for atezolizumab), tumor mutational burden (load)
2019 has granted accelerated approval for the use of atezolizumab [TMB/TML], microsatellite instability status (MSI) and the
in combination with carboplatin and etoposide chemotherapy number of TILs (Tables 1 and 2). PD-L1 expression in cancer or
for the first-line treatment of adult patients with extensive-stage immune cells as detected by immunohistochemistry has been
SCLC (ES-SCLC). Approval was based on the IMpower133 shown to be one of the most reliable predictive biomarkers
(NCT02763579), a randomized (1:1), multicenter, double-blind, as confirmed in the IMpassion130 (NCT02425891) study. For
placebo-controlled trial in 403 patients with ES-SCLC. Patients detection purposes, four out of five diagnostic antibodies have
receiving atezolizumab with chemotherapy showed improved been validated as either companion or complementary diag-
median overall survival of 12.3 months compared to 10.3 months nostics (Table 1). Indeed, the current FDA approval of atezoli-
for those on placebo with chemotherapy (hazard ratio [HR] zumab in the treatment of TNBC applies only to patients
0.70; 95% CI: 0.54, 0.91; p = 0.0069). Furthermore, patients on the whose breast cancers express PD-L1 in an FDA-approved test
checkpoint inhibitor plus chemotherapy had a median PFS of (i.e., the Ventana diagnostic antibody SP142).
5.2 months compared with 4.3 months in the placebo with che- This recent FDA approval of atezolizumab plus chemo-
motherapy arm of the trial (HR 0.77; 0.62, 0.96; p = 0.0170) . therapy for the treatment of adults with PD-L1-positive, unre-
This approval has changed the standard first-line therapy for the sectable, locally advanced, or metastatic TNBC represents
first time in several decades for this cancer . Despite concerns the first cancer immunotherapy regimen to be approved for
over the cost-effectiveness of checkpoint inhibitor-based immu- the management of breast cancer. It is truly a landmark thera-
notherapy , these recent FDA approvals (e.g., for NSCLC, peutic development for patients with TNBC given the limited
ES-SCLC, and TNBC as discussed herein) have firmly established treatment options available for this heterogeneous, but a highly
TABLE 2. The status of predictive biomarkers to immune checkpoint inhibitors in cancers with approved anti-PD-1/PD-L1 agents and
breast cancer
Predictive biomarker to checkpoint inhibitor Cancer type Status in breast cancer
PD-L1 expression (TC and/or IC)* NSCLC 21-56% in ER-negative breast cancers (TNBC and HER2-positive)
Bladder cancer
HNSCC
Cervical cancer
Gastric/GEJ cancer
PD-L1 (CD274) gene amplification [56,57] Classical HL (36%) ~1-2%
RCC (Sarcomatoid) (6%)
HNSCC (~3%)
NSCLC (~2%)
High tumor mutational load (burden) [58,59] Melanoma Predominantly low
NSCLC
Bladder
Merkel cell carcinoma
Hepatocellular carcinoma
MSI-H or MMR-D Tumor-agnostic** Low (~1%)
Renal cell carcinoma
Increased TILs Colorectal carcinoma Common in ER-negative breast cancers (TNBC and HER2-positive)
Gastric/GEJ cancer
*Assessed by immunohistochemistry, **Tumor-agnostic approach implies a treatment based on a specific genomic/molecular/abnormality in a cancer,
rather than its anatomic or histologic origins ; good examples of such an approach include immune checkpoint inhibitors and tropomyosin kinase
receptor (TRK) inhibitors (e.g., larotrectinib). TC: Tumor cells; IC: Inflammatory (immune) cells; ER: Estrogen receptor; GEJ: Gastroesophageal junction;
NSCLC: Non-small cell lung carcinoma; HNSCC: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma; TNBC: Triple-negative breast cancer; RCC: Renal cell carcinoma;
HL: Hodgkin’s lymphoma; MSI-H: Microsatellite instability high; MMR-D: Mismatch repair deficient; TILs: Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes
230
Farhan S. Cyprian, et al.: Atezolizumab in triple-negative breast cancer
aggressive subtype of breast cancer . Chemotherapy alone  Lee A, Djamgoz MB. Triple negative breast cancer: Emerging ther-
apeutic modalities and novel combination therapies. Cancer Treat
had been the mainstay of treatment for many years for TNBC
Rev 2018;62:110-22.
and so the approval of this checkpoint inhibitor combination 
for people with PD-L1-positive TNBC disease fulfills an unmet  Solinas C, Gombos A, Latifyan S, Piccart-Gebhart M, Kok M,
Buisseret L, et al. Targeting immune checkpoints in breast cancer:
medical need. Hopefully, several additional ongoing trials with
An update of early results. ESMO Open 2017;2(5):e000255.
immune checkpoint inhibitors other than atezolizumab  
will endorse the results from the IMpassion130 (NCT02425891)  Joneja U, Vranic S, Swensen J, Feldman R, Chen W, Kimbrough J,
et al. Comprehensive profiling of metaplastic breast carcinomas
study. Additional efforts are also required to optimize predic-
reveals frequent overexpression of programmed death-ligand 1.
tive biomarkers in TNBC (PD-L1 antibody selection, Table 1, J Clin Pathol 2017;70(3):255-9.
threshold for positivity, cancer vs. immune cells expression,
 Dill EA, Gru AA, Atkins KA, Friedman LA, Moore ME, Bullock TN,
further dissection of the breast cancer immune microenviron- et al. PD-L1 expression and intratumoral heterogeneity across
ment, Figure 1)  and to maximize the effectiveness of these breast cancer subtypes and stages: An assessment of 245 primary
and 40 metastatic tumors. Am J Surg Pathol 2017;41(3):334-42.
important class of immune-targeting therapeutic agents.
 Ghebeh H, Mohammed S, Al-Omair A, Qattan A, Lehe C,
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS Al-Qudaihi G, et al. The B7-H1 (PD-L1) T lymphocyte-inhibitory
molecule is expressed in breast cancer patients with infiltrating
ductal carcinoma: Correlation with important high-risk prognostic
ZG is employed by Caris Life Sciences, which commer- factors. Neoplasia 2006;8(3):190-8.
cially offers testing for PD-L1. Other authors declare no con-
 Mittendorf EA, Philips AV, Meric-Bernstam F, Qiao N, Wu Y,
flict of interests. Harrington S, et al. PD-L1 expression in triple-negative breast can-
cer. Cancer Immunol Res 2014;2(4):361-70.