NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
Published in final edited form as:
Curr Probl Cancer. 2011 ; 35(1): 7–50. doi:10.1016/j.currproblcancer.2010.12.002.
PARP Inhibitor Treatment in Ovarian and Breast Cancer
Marcie K. Weil, M.D. and Alice Chen, M.D.
National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute, Division of Cancer Development and
Therapeutics
INTRODUCTION
Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors have raised recent excitement because of
the activity reported in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) with iniparib (BSI 201)  and
BRCA 1 or 2 associated ovarian or breast cancer with olaparib (AZ 2281) . This class of
agents is thought to augment cytotoxic therapy without increasing side effects and to kill
cancer cells with DNA repair defects as a single agent. The genomic instability of some
tumor cells allows PARP inhibitors to have selectivity for the tumor cells over normal cells.
DNA damages result from errors in replication, production of reactive oxygen species, and
exposure to ultraviolet rays and ionizing radiation. These lesions that result from these
noxious events include point mutations, single strand breaks (SSBs), double strand breaks
(DSBs), intrastrand and interstrand cross-links. Cells employ multiple types of DNA repair
mechanisms: base excision repair (BER), nucleic acid excision repair (NER), homologous
recombination(HR), single strand annealing (SSA), Mismatch Repair (MMR), and non-
homologous end joining (NHEJ) to repair these damages on a regular basis. As a result of
DNA repair, injured cells can survive, which is optimal for normal cells, but exactly the
opposite of the goal for tumor cells that undergo DNA damage in response to chemotherapy
or radiation. In addition, errors can occur in the repair process especially with NHEJ that can
lead to new abnormalities and dysfunction of the cells. Certain genetic disorders, such as
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, as well as other genetic anomalies that prevent DNA repair
are associated with increased risk of malignancies. 
PARP is a family of proteins with enzymatic properties, scaffolding properties, and
recruiting ability for other necessary DNA repair proteins.  PARP 1 and PARP 2 are the
best known of these proteins and are critical for the function of BER. BER repairs single
strand DNA breaks and inhibition of BER may ultimately lead to cell death. This makes
PARP proteins ideal targets for anticancer therapy. PARP inhibitors interfere with BER and
therefore DNA repair. By this route, PARP inhibitors can affect death of tumor cells. PARP
inhibitors currently under clinical development are targeted to PARP 1 and PARP 2
proteins. They include Pfizer’s PF 01367338 (AG014699), AstraZeneca’s olaparib
(AZD2281, KU-0059436), sanofi-aventis’ iniparib (BSI 201), Abbott Laboratories’
veliparib (ABT 888), Merck’s MK 4827, and Cephalon’s CEP 9722. Biomarin’s BMN673
(LT-673) and BiPar Science’s BSI 401 are in preclinical development.
6130 Executive Boulevard, Rockville, Maryland 20852, Chenali@mail.nih.gov, PHONE NUMBER 301-496-1196, FAX NUMBER
301-402-0428.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 2
Like with so many other therapies, resistance has been reported with PARP inhibitors.
Resistance can develop via reversion of BRCA deficiency from the mutational reading
frame to a reading frame that produces a wild type BRCA protein. This occurs through a
second mutation, compensatory mutations, or crossovers. Up-regulating the p-
glycoprotein efflux pump and turning off 53BP1 have been shown as a possible mechanisms
of resistance. [6–7] Also, resistance has been shown in tumors with increased tumor
expression of PARP. Overcoming this resistance can be achieved through a mutation that
converts the cell back to the mutated form, another mutation that inhibits HR, a proteosome
inhibitor downregulating the P-glycoprotein pump, or up-regulation of 53BP1. Recently 6-
Thioguanine has been shown to be active in cells resistant to PARP inhibitors in BRCA2
deficient tumors. 
The multiple areas of exploration of PARP inhibitors include the biology of the PARP
inhibitors, DNA repair mechanisms, genetic defects of DNA repair, exploration of the
clinical efficacy and toxicity, biomarkers for identifying target tumors, possibility of
inducing tumors to be more sensitive to PARP inhibitors, development of new agents, and
overcoming PARP inhibitor resistance (PIR). This review article will discuss these areas
with focus on PARP inhibitors in the treatment of breast and ovarian cancers.
DNA REPAIR MECHANISMS
Genomic Instability of Tumors
Tumor cells, because of the frequency of their replication and their genomic susceptibility,
have increased frequency of mutations which make them resilient against normal cell death,
but may at the same time provide targets for antitumor therapy. Genomic instability can be
in the form of mutational instability, consisting of point mutations and small deletions, and
chromosomal instability, including gross rearrangements, such as loss or gains of whole
chromosomes or fragments, amplifications, and fusion of genes.
BER, MMR and NER of SSB
DNA repair mechanisms correct single strand breaks (SSBs) and double strand breaks
(DSBs). (Fig. 1). In SSBs the complementary DNA strand is used as template; in DSBs the
complementary strand is not readily available. There are estimated 10 4 SSBs daily.  The
process for SSB repair is accomplished by BER and MMR and NER. BER involves
removing a damaged base by a DNA glycosylase. BER is involved in the repair of damages
from radiation and alkylating agents. BER is the defect involved in xeroderma pigmentosa,
which increases UV sensitivity and skin cancer. PARP1 and 2 are integrally involved in
BER. MMR corrects mismatched bases that may occur during the replication process. It
involves genes MSH 2 and MLH1. Fifteen percent of colon cancer has MMR resulting in
microsatellite instability. These tumors behave differently from other colon cancer and
respond differently to treatment.  Knowing the genetic and molecular characteristics of
tumors allows for differential treatment of individual patient’s tumors and subsequently
personalized medicine. Nucleotide Excision Repair (NER) removes large patches of
nucleotides around the “bad” base in its repair. It corrects damages from UV light and
hydrocarbons.
HR and NHEJ Repair of DSB
HR and NHEJ) work to correct DSBs. When DSBs occur, ATM and CHEK2 kinases
mobilize proteins such as BRCA 1 protein. BRCA 2 carries Rad51, the recombination
enzyme, to the DSB site. A complex of Fanconi anemia proteins, A, C, D2, E, F, and G,
cause the ubiquitinization of D2 protein and the subsequent association of D2 with BRCA 1.
(Fig. 2) All of this ultimately leads to repair the DSB with minimal error in the DNA. If
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 3
there is a defect in BRCA 1 or BRCA 2, then the DSB repair is carried out by error prone
mechanisms, such as NHEJ, increasing the risk of chromosomal aberrations.
There are two processes of HR, gene conversion, which uses the homologous sequence,
usually within the sister chromatid, as the template, and thereby usually repairs without
error. (Fig. 3) It is this process that relies on RAD51 as the recombinase. It must be
understood, however, that an “error-free” mechanism can result in loss of heterozygosity
which can bring about inactivation of a tumor suppressor gene or activation of an oncogene,
still leading the carcinogenesis of tissue. The other HR process is single strand annealing
(SSA). SSA uses the homologous strand, but this time without RAD51, and frequently
results in changes in the DNA sequence.
NHEJ is another mechanism that repairs DSBs. It is error prone, frequently resulting in
gross chromosomal rearrangements, including translocations. NHEJ does not involve Rad
51. When HR is defective, NHEJ serves to repair DSBs, resulting in increased frequency of
new mutations. 
Mutations in genes that result in defective HR, increase risk of developing breast and
ovarian cancers. BRCA 1 and BRCA 2 are tumor suppressor genes involved in the HR
pathway. Fanconi’s anemia, which predisposes to acute myeloid leukemia and squamous-
cell carcinomas, also is associated with breast cancer. Six of the 8 subtypes of Fanconi’s
anemia have a known germline mutation. Since the proteins in the Fanconi’s anemia
complex are responsible for making D2 attach to BRCA 1 in the HR pathway, a defect in
any of the subunits of the complex will cause chromosomal defects similar to defective
BRCA 1 and BRCA 2 proteins. BRCA 2 itself is mutated in a small number of patients with
Fanconi’s anemia, usually in Fanconi’s anemia type D1, and possibly also in type B. [12,15]
Defects in DSB repair are involved in ataxia telangiectasia (AT) and Nijmegen breakage
syndrome (NBS). Ataxia telangiectasia, which is autosomal recessive with mutation at
11q22–q23 and results in a defect in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene,
predisposes patients to malignancy. The ATM protein is involved in the HR pathway and
DSB repair. Ataxia telangiectasia patients have 16 fold greater risk of developing breast
cancer over the general population. The heterozygous state is responsible for 7% of all
breast cancers. Ataxia telangiectasia patients also have an increase in the risk of GI, lung and
lymphoid cancers. The disorder makes the patient more sensitive to the effects of radiation.
AT and NBS are just 2 examples of defects in DNA repair predisposing to the development
of malignancies. [16–18]
DSBs can be quantitated which can be exploited as a biomarker for measuring the efficacy
in anticancer treatment. As a reaction to DSBs, H2AX become phosphorylated and form γ-
H2AX foci, which can be measured. Recently, NCI had developed an assay for measuring γ-
H2AX in circulating tumor cells.  Many proteins involved in HR are contained in the
Rad51 foci, which can also be measured in the laboratory. HR deficient cells do not form
Rad51 foci in response to DNA damage. PARP 1 is not associated w/ Rad51 foci. Rad51
foci form in PARP −/− cells in response to hydroxyurea. PARP 1 inhibited cells respond to
DSB with HR and show increased Rad51 foci. This shows that PARP 1 is not directly
involved in HR. .
Poly-(Adenoribosyl)phoshatase, PARP
Poly-(Adenoribosyl)phoshatase, PARP, is in an enzyme that is involved in BER. This
enzyme has been known since 1963 when Chambon, Weill, and Mandel wrote Nicotinamide
Mononucleotide Activation of New DNA-Dependent Polyadenylic Acid Synthesizing
Nuclear Enzyme in the journal, .Biochemical and Biophysical. Research Communications.
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 4
 Shall, Durkacz, and Omidiji in 1980 proposed that modulating PARP 1 might augment
the effect of alkylator chemotherapy. 
The PARP family consists of 17 proteins if based on structural similarity, but only 6 proteins
if based on function.  The three groups consist of the following:
Group 1 containing PARP 1, PARP 2, and PARP 3,
Group 2 containing PARP 4, also called vault PARP, and
Group 3 containing tankyrase (TNKS) and TNKS2 
PARP proteins are composed of two ribose moieties and two phosphates per unit polymer.
PARP 1 is the protein that is best understood. It is active in its homodimeric form. It has 3
functional domains, the DNA-binding domain (DBD), the automodification domain (AD),
and the catalytic domain. The amino-terminal DBD is 42 kDa. It contains 3 zinc fingers, two
that bind PARP 1 to DNA breaks, and a third that couples DNA damage-induced changes in
the DBD to catalytic activity. The 16 kDa AD portion contains glutamate and lysine amino
acids that accept ADP-ribose units, resulting in self poly (ADP-ribosyl)ation. The AD unit
houses the BRCA 1 carboxyl-terminal (BRCT) repeat motif, similar to DNA sequences in
other proteins involved in DNA repair. The C-terminal catalytic domain is 55 KDa. It holds
the signature sequence containing the most conserved sequence of the PARP family. In this
domain ADP-ribose transferase facilitates the transfer of ADP-ribose from nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) to protein acceptors within this domain.
PARP proteins are activated by DNA strand breaks. These proteins carry vital roles for
survival of cells and organisms. Mice can survive without PARP 1 or PARP 2, but not
without both. [25–26] Similarly, they can survive without TNKS or TNKS 2, but not
without both. PARPs by definition must be able to transfer ADP-ribose from NAD+ to an
acceptor protein and add multiple subunits to the PAR.  It is not known at this time if
PARP 3 and PARP 4 form the multiple subunits of PAR, so these proteins may not be true
PARPs.  PARP 3 might activate PARP 1 without DNA breaks.  PARP must be at
least 90% inhibited to suppress DNA repair. 
PARP 1 is active in a homodimeric state. It detects and binds to sites of single strand DNA
damage via the DNA-binding domain. It then synthesizes poly(ADP) ribose (pADPr, PAR)
and transfers it to acceptor proteins. The acceptor proteins can be located on PARP 1 itself
or on other proteins involved in DNA repair. The negative charge of PAR causes PARP 1 to
lose its affinity for DNA. PAR recruits other repair proteins to the damaged DNA site.
Poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase (PARG) and possibly ADP-ribose hydrolase 3 (ARH3)
break pADPr into ADP-ribose molecules, which are metabolized further to AMP. The
increased AMP:ATP ratio triggers the metabolic sensor AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK). MTORC1 is thereby inhibited, inducing autophagy.  Thus cellular energy
homeostasis is regulated. In the process of making PAR, NAD+ is converted to
nicotinamide. To replenish the NAD+ from nicotinamide, phosphoribosylpyrophosphate
(PRPP) and ATP are converted to AMP and pyrophosphate. In the case of extreme DNA
damage, as with ischemia, PARP 1 hyperactivation results in depletion of NAD+ and ATP,
resulting in cell death by necrosis or apoptosis.
PAR covalently and noncovalently binds proteins that work in the repair of DNA or works
on these proteins via pADPr-binding proteins. The largest amount of PAR stays attached to
PARP 1. PAR binds XRCC1, the scaffolding protein. PAR regulates histone H1’s binding to
chromatin, allowing the chromatin to relax. PARP is involved in methylation and
transcription of genes coding for cell cycle and stress response, including p53. Experiments
with PARP−/− mice  and human breast cancer cells that have PARP 1 downregulated
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 5
by PARP 1 short-hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) showed alteration of these genes. . PAR
attaches DNA polymerase β to site to replace the missing bases. Finally PAR combines with
DNA ligase III to seal the DNA.
PAR is involved in DSB repair as well. It attaches to DNA-protein kinase catalytic subunit
(DNA-PKs), Ku 70 and Ku80, to allow DSB repair through NHEJ DNA ligase.  PAR
recruits ATM, MRE11, and topoisomerase 1, all involved n DSB repair. [34–35] (Fig. 4)
The half-life of PAR is seconds to minutes. However, it initiates activities of DNA repair
that last longer.
PARP 1 also activates genes in a more direct manner in addition to correcting DNA damage.
It activates NF-κB, a stress-inducible transcription complex, which is part of the immune
system, and which inhibits apoptosis and promotes proliferation. NF-κB exhibits increased
expression in cancers. It is constitutively activated in breast cancer, particularly in those that
are hormone refractory and those with worse prognoses. NF-κB correlates with progression
of disease. It is also activated by XRT and chemotherapy. Inhibition of NF-κB sensitizes
cells to XRT and chemotherapy. 
PARP 1 has some responsibility in the activation of HIF-1α. When PARP 1 was inhibited
chemically or by knock-out genes in a mouse experiment, there was decreased tumor growth
and tumor vasculature. There was also decreased expression of HIF-1α, activation protein-1
(AP-1), and NF-κB, and other genes involved in carcinogenesis and inflammation.  (Fig.
5)
PARP 1 −/− cells in mice have shown increased sensitivity to DNA damaging chemicals,
such as alkylating agents, and radiation. This finding makes sense since those cells have
decreased ability to repair the DNA damage from those exposures. 
PARP 2 is also activated by DNA damage and synthesizes PAR; however, it is only
responsible for 15% of the cell’s PAR production. [39–41] In PARP 1 −/− mice, where
PARP2 responds to DNA damage, less NAD+ is consumed, and there is also less necrosis in
the tissues compared with normal mice. PARP 2−/− mice have increased sensitivity to
alkylators and radiation, increased genomic instability, abnormal spermatogenesis, abnormal
adipogenesis, and abnormal T cell development. Defects in spermatogenesis, adipogenesis,
and T cell development are not seen in PARP 1 −/− mice. 
PARP 3 and PARP 4 may not be true PARP family members. PARP 3 makes mono-ADP
ribose moieties, rather than poly-ADP ribose. Whether PARP 4, a possible tumor
suppressor, makes PAR at all is unknown. Interestingly, PARP 4 deficiency is associated
with a higher incidence of colon cancer. 
TNKS and TNKS 2 maintain telomere lengths via poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation in human cell
lines, but not in mice. The structure of the protein differs between species. In human cells,
TNKS is involved in mitotic spindle formation, but TNKD 2 is not.  TNKS and TNKS 2
are also involved in Wnt signaling. In the normal Wnt signaling pathway, Wnt binds to a
cell surface receptor signaling beta-catenin to enter the nucleus and promote gene
expression. If Wnt is not present, the beta-catenin is degraded by the beta-catenin
destruction complex. The Wnt pathway is deregulated in many cancers. TNKS and TNKS 2
cause axin, the concentration-limiting piece of the destruction complex, to degrade through
the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. XAV939, a small molecule found through the high
throughput process, inhibits TNKS and TNKS 2, thereby allowing axin to persist and
destruction of Beta-catenin, inhibiting transcription.  (Fig. 6)
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 6
SYNTHETIC LETHALITY
Synthetic lethality is when two conditions that independently would not cause cell death in
combination with each other are lethal.
PARP 1 −/− mice are viable and fertile and do not develop tumors prematurely. PARP
inhibitors bring about increase in γ-H2AX and RAD51 foci formation, indicating that DSB
form and HR is initiated after exposure to PARP inhibitors. Without PARP 1, SSBs collapse
replication forks and initiate HR. If the PARP 1 deficient cell is also deficient in BRCA 2
HR cannot occur. (Fig. 7), and the cell then dies or undergoes error prone recombination.
In mouse experiments using siRNA to knock out specific genes, the following findings were
noted:
1. Cells depleted of both PARP 1 + BRCA 2 had reduced survival
2. Cells depleted of both PARP 2 + BRCA 2 did not have reduced survival
3. Cells depleted of PARP 1+ PARP 2 + BRCA 2 had survival similar to the PARP 1
+ BRCA 2 only depleted cells.
These results show that PARP 1, rather than PARP 2, is the PARP primarily responsible for
DNA repair.  
Proteins other than BRCA could cause synthetic lethality in combination with PARP
inhibitors. Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) is a prevalent tumor suppressor gene
involved in expression of RAD51, and thus involved in HR. As another example of
synthetic lethality, PTEN-deficient cells are sensitive to PARP inhibitors in vitro and in vivo.
Clinical trials are underway evaluating activity of PARP inhibitors in patients with
decreased PTEN expression, common in endometrial cancer and glioblastoma, as well as in
malignant melanoma, prostate, breast, lung and colorectal cancers. 
Mutated Fanconi’s anemia proteins, which also render HR ineffective, could also signal
cells that might be susceptible to synthetic lethality when exposed to agents that inhibit
PARP. 
There are two great advantages of exploiting synthetic lethality. One, inhibiting PARP 1
alone may be sufficient to cause tumor cell death and avoid the toxic effects of
chemotherapy and radiation. Two, it is possible that the therapy can target only the tumor
tissue and avoid normal tissue. Most people with BRCA mutations are heterozygous for the
abnormality. As will be discussed later, in rare instances people have a double or triple
heterozygous pattern. The homozygous pattern in a germline is nonviable. The genotype of
the tumor, on the other hand, can be homozygous after a second hit occurs. Theoretically it
makes sense that if the tumor, containing the homozygous pattern, resulted in defective HR,
and normal tissue carries the heterozygous pattern and normal HR, then exposure to the
PARP inhibitor would provide synthetic lethality selective only for the tumor.
Interestingly, however, a study done by King showed that whereas ovarian tumors
demonstrate a homozygous pattern for BRCA mutations, breast cancers can demonstrate a
heterozygous pattern in the tumor and there can even be loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the
mutant gene, leaving the wild type active. These findings confuse our theory of synthetic
lethality in breast cancer. It is possible that PARP inhibitors are working by the other
mechanisms. Alternatively, the study may have come to the wrong conclusion based on
possible sampling error since not all parts of the tumor were sampled, or perhaps HR is
defective in these cells based on epigenetic influences on the BRCA gene rather than
changes in the genes themselves. 
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 7
BREAST CANCER
In U.S. in 2010 there will be 200,000 female and 2000 male new cases and 40,000 female
and 400 male deaths from breast cancer. Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease from the
stand point of the tissue it affects and its genetic and proteomic characteristics. Ductal
carcinoma occurs in the tubules that in a normal and lactating state would carry the milk
from the lobules to the nipple; lobular carcinoma stems from the milk-producing glands.
 Based on gene expression there are 5 types of breast cancer, including luminal, luminal
B, human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER-2) overexpressing, basal-like, and
normal-like. HER2-over expressing tumors and basal breast cancers have the worst
prognoses.  The basal-like phenotype is ER negative, PR, negative, HER2-negative, and
either EGFR or cytokeratin 5/6 positive. Approximately 17% of breast cancers are triple
negative (ER negative, PR negative and HER-2 negative), and 15% are basal-like. The
basal-like tumor is prevalent in premenopausal African American women, which may
account for the worse prognosis in that population. Basal-like tumors are mitotically active,
high grade, invasive, and associated with younger age. Eighty to ninety percent of hereditary
BRCA 1 breast carcinoma have features similar to basal-like tumors.  Basal-like breast
cancers are basically triple negative breast cancers with one additional feature. Triple
negative breast cancers express upregulation of PARP 1.  In fact most breast cancers
that are classified as triple negative are also basal-like. The upregulation of PARP 1 in
TNBC would make TNBC potentially sensitive to PARP inhibitors.
OVARIAN CANCER
In the U.S. there are 22,000 new cases of ovarian cancer and 14,000 deaths per year due to
this diagnosis. Ovarian cancer accounts for 6% of cancers in women. Most ovarian tumors
are either epithelial carcinomas, beginning from non-ova tissue or malignant germ cell
tumors, from the ova tissues themselves. The epithelial tumors are further divided into type
1, including low grade and endometrioid, mucinous, and low grade serous, and type 2,
including high-grade serous. If caught early ovarian cancer is 90% curable; however, the
symptoms are nonspecific and the cancer is usually detected in advance stages, when the
chance of cure is usually less than 20%. Ninety percent of cases are sporadic and ten percent
have a predisposing genetic defect.  Ninety percent of patients with familial
predisposition carry the BRCA defect. BRCA mutations are not usually seen in low grade
serous ovarian cancer. . Three syndromes predispose to the development of ovarian
cancer, hereditary breast –ovarian cancer syndrome, hereditary non-polyposis colorectal
cancer (Lynch syndrome), and hereditary site-specific ovarian cancer. Hereditary breast-
ovarian cancer syndrome is associated with BRCA 1 and BRCA 2; hereditary site-specific
ovarian cancer is associated with BRCA 1. Lynch Syndrome is associated with germline
mutations of mismatch repair genes. Familial ovarian cancers usually occur in at a younger
age than sporadic. Patients with BRCA mutations develop ovarian cancer at an average age
of about 50 years old. A large percent of the familial ovarian cancers also have over-
expression of Her2. 
Serous ovarian carcinomas account for 60–80% of ovarian tumors. Ninety percent of serous
ovarian tumors are high grade.  They are the more aggressive subtype. BRCA 1 and
BRCA 2 mutations are present in 23% of high grade serous cancers.  The prognosis with
the genetic form of high grade serous ovarian carcinoma that is associated with BRCA
mutation seems to be better than the sporadic cases.  .  The improved prognosis
of BRCA mutated tumors may be secondary to the impaired DNA repair in these cells that
lead to greater sensitivity to treatment.  
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 8
BRCA
Mutations of BRCA 1 and BRCA 2, two tumor suppressor genes, predispose cells to
increased risk and malignancies. BRCA 1, on chromosome 17, and BRCA 2, on
chromosome 13, both increase the risk of breast and ovarian cancers. BRCA2, however,
contributes less to the risk of ovarian cancer, but more to the risk of male breast cancer and
pancreatic cancer. [54,61] The BRCA mutations are most prevalent in people of Ashkenazi
Jewish (Jews from Eastern European) descent. In that population the predominant mutations
are 185delAG and 5382insC in BRCA 1 and 6174delT in BRCA 2. Although these
mutations occur only in 2.5% of the Ashkenazi population, they account for 70–85% of
germline mutations in patients with heritable breast cancer and ovarian cancer. Only 5–10%
of breast cancers and 10% of ovarian cancers are associated with a known genetic mutation,
so BRCA mutations are not that common. Having the mutation increases the risk of
contracting ovarian cancer up to 63% and breast cancer up to 87%. 
Usually the germline is heterozygous, not homozygous, for the mutation; however, double
and even triple heterozygous combinations have been identified in rare instances. The
incidence of a double heterozygous state is 0.22–0.87% in BRCA carriers and up to 1.8% in
Ashkenazi BRCA carriers. Those genotypes have no worse features, in terms of age of
onset, lifetime risks, and numbers of tumors, compared with the single heterozygous state. It
important to evaluate for a multiple heterozygous state for genetic counseling and so others
within the family are aware of their risks. 
BRCA testing is available commercially. Scales have been developed to provide guidance
on the probability of having a mutation in BRCA 1 or 2, including FHAT, Manchester
Score, Frank, Couch and Bayesian Probabilistic Model (BRCAPRO). The most accurate one
is the BRCAPRO.  These scales are based on family history of breast and ovarian
cancers, early age of onset of breast and ovarian cancer in patient and/or family members,
multiple tumors in a single patient, breast cancer in men, cancer-free survival in first- or
second degree relatives, and ethnicity.
“BRCAness”
BRCAness is a profile of tumor cells that share traits with BRCA 1 or BRCA 2 mutated
tumors. Cells with BRCAness have defective HR and improved response and survival with
exposure to platinum agents. The cells with BRCAness may or may not contain known
BRCA 1 or BRCA 2 germline mutations. 
BRCA 1 mutations are rare in sporadic cancers, but reduced expression of normal BRCA 1
might still be an important feature in non-inherited breast cancer and ovarian cancer.
BRCA1expression is decreased in high grade ductal carcinoma revealing that BRCA 1
expression might be reduced even in sporadic breast and ovarian carcinomas. The reduction
in expression might be due to allelic loss of chromosome 17q which houses BRCA 1, a
phenomena which is known to occur  . In this situation, however, a wild type copy
of BRCA 1 would still be present, accounting for at least some normal BRCA 1 expression.
Hypermethylation of the BRCA1 regulatory region, which could inhibit transcription, has
also been found in sporadic breast and ovarian cancers.    
Sporadic breast cancers have been found to have two times less messenger RNA expression
and 9 times higher level of BRCA 1 negative regulator, ID4.  Sixty three percent of
metaplastic breast cancer, a rare form of basal-like breast cancer, had BRCA1 promoter
methylation compared with 12% of controls.  Microarrays also show similar gene
patterns between familial BRCA 1 breast cancers and basal-like sporadic breast cancers.
[51,73–74] So triple negative breast cancer, basal-like breast cancers, and BRCA 1 germline
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 9
breast cancers might all harbor the same tumorgenesis mechanism through BRCA 1
dysfunction. For that reason, all of these types of breast cancer are being explored as
possible histologies that might benefit from PARP inhibitors through the synthetic lethality
concept. Sporadic ovarian tumors also showed gene profiles that were either BRCA 1-like or
BRCA-2 like.  Twenty-five percent of BRCA mutations in the ovarian tumors were not
germline.  Few breast and ovarian cancers have BRCA germline mutations; somatic
BRCA mutations account for up to 20% of high-grade ovarian tumors. The presence of the
sporadic mutation increases the population that could benefit from PARP inhibitor therapy.
In addition, other mutations, [77–78]  and epigenetic effects have been found to impart
BRCAness to the cells. Hypermethylation of the BRCA 1 promoter  and loss of function
mutations in other genes that affect the HR pathway  have been found to endow
BRCAness to cells.
To find the genetic profile for cells with BRCAness, studies were carried out with
microarrays of epithelial ovarian tumors with known germline mutations, a pancreatic tumor
cell line known to have BRCA mutation, and sporadic epithelial ovarian tumors. A heat map
showing the gene profile of tumors with and without the BRCA mutation differentiated
specific patterns for BRCA like (BL) and not BRCA like (NBL) tumors with 94% accuracy
in 61 patients.
In 6 patients with ovarian cancer with BRCA 1 and BRCA 2 germline mutations, biopsies
were taken prior to cisplatin therapy and in 4 of those patients biopsies were taken after
therapy. Eight of the ten biopsies showed correlation between BL and cisplatin sensitivity
and between NBL and cisplatin resistance. In 2 of the 3 tumors that became resistant during
the therapy, the microarray profile changed from BL to NBL. The correlation between
BRCAness and RAD51 foci, as a marker of HR, was examined in the BRCA 2 mutated
pancreatic cell line. Of 12 platinum resistant clones, seven clones formed RAD51 foci after
receiving ionizing radiation. The profiles of 6 of those 7 clones showed reversion to
functional BRCA 2 because of secondary BRCA 2 mutation that canceled the effect of the
inherited BRCA 2 mutation. The 5 clones that did not exhibit RAD51 foci retained the
nonfunctional BRCA2 mutation. In addition, the BRCAness profile accurately predicted
PARP sensitivity in the clones. The restoration of BRCA function through a secondary
mutation is a potential resistance mechanism to the PARP inhibitors. Evaluation of patients
with epithelial ovarian cancer who did not harbor the BRCA mutation gene was evaluated
for the BRCAness genetic profile. Those with BL profile had median DFS of 34 months
compared with the NBL profile with median DFS of 15 months. The median OS for BL and
NBL profiles were 72 and 41 months, respectively. The BRCAness profile had independent
prognostic significance in multivariate analysis including age, stage, grade, histology, and
debulking status (Fig. 8). 
Some possible mechanisms of developing BRCAness, aside from inherent or sporadic
BRCA mutations, include the following:
1. Increased expression of proteins that inactivate BRCA, including EMSY 
2. BRCA promoter methylation [65,71,82]
3. FANCF promoter methylation [83–84]
4. Defects in other Fanconi’s anemia complex proteins 
5. Decreased expression of other proteins involved in HR, including RAD51, ATR,
ATM, CHK2. 
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 10
6. PTEN deficiency 
There are likely undiscovered mechanisms of accruing BRCAness as well.
The area of BRCAness is still undergoing multiple lines of investigation. TNBC is now
being studied to see if the profiles for BRCAness in ovarian and pancreatic cancers apply.
That TNBC shows some response to platinum agents would lead one to believe that the
profile would apply. Clinical testing for PARP inhibitors for patients with sporadic tumors
with the BRCAness profile is being planned.
PARP INHIBITORS
The rationale for PARP inhibitors is that by inhibiting BER, these agents can prevent repair
that occurs after cytotoxic chemotherapy that causes SSBs, and also they can work by
creating synthetic lethality in cells with underlying HR defects. PARP inhibitors compete
with NAD+ at the enzyme’s active site. Because this site is present in other enzymes, PARP
inhibitors might act in a nonspecific manner. PARP must be inhibited by at least 90% to
obstruct DNA repair.  All PARP inhibitors are thought to inhibit both PARP 1 and
PARP 2.
In 1971 nicotinamide was found to be a weak inhibitor of PARP. [87–89] The first
generation of inhibitors included nicotinamide analogues. The first widely tested agent, 3
aminobenzamide developed in 1980 , was not as selective and 1000 times less potent
compared with newer inhibitors. The second generation, including PD128763, NU1025, was
50 times more potent than 3-aminobenzamide. Current PARP inhibitors in development are
the third generation PARP inhibitors and have greater potency and specificity for PARP. See
Table 1. These inhibitors are primarily based on benzamide or purine structures. The
specificity may allow for less off target effect of PARP inhibitors during treatment and less
toxicities. 
PARP inhibitors in combination with cytotoxic therapy
DNA methylating agents, including dacarbazine and temozolomide, were discovered to
activate PARP 1. The methylating agents caused SSB that required BER. PARP 1 elicited
resistance to methylating agents.  However, if PARP inhibitors are utilized to disable
BER, the SSBs caused by the methylating agents could not be repaired. Subsequently these
SSB lead to DSBs. If HR is overwhelmed by the addition of SSB, cell death occurs.
Loss of mismatch repair (MMR) also caused cellular resistance to temozolomide. In wild
type cells, MMR would either correct errors in replication or cause replication arrest or cell
death; in MMR-deficient cells, survival prevails with abnormal DNA.  MMR-deficient
cells have poor response to temozolomide. Defects in MMR are associated with colon and
ovarian cancers. 3 aminobenzamide augmented the efficacy of temozolomide in MMR
deficient and MMR proficient cells. [92–93] In a later experiment, AG14361, another PARP
inhibitor, enhanced the effect of temozolomide in MMR-deficient cells more than in MMR-
proficient cells, eliminating the resistance incurred by the MMR-deficient state.  Only
tumor cells are deficient in MMR, providing selective killing of tumor cells by the
combination of PARP inhibitors with methylating agents. [23,90] In an orthotopic rat glioma
model the combination of veliparib in combination with temozolomide significantly slowed
tumor progression; whereas, temozolomide as single agent had no significant effect. 
The cytotoxicity of camptothecins, topoisomerase I inhibitors, is also enhanced by PARP
inhibitors. Topoisomerase I cleaves, unwinds and decreases torsional strain of DNA.
Topoisomerase I inhibitors promote DNA breakage. Studies in hamster ovary cells show
that topoisomerase I inhibitors have a stronger effect on cell killing in BER defective cells
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 11
compared with BER competent cells. However, when AG 14361 is added to topoisomerase
inhibitors, there is a more significant decrease on the LC 50 in the BER competent cells. The
PARP inhibitor seems to overcome the resistance to topoisomerase inhibition in BER
competent cells. Resistance to camptothecins due to XRCC1 overexpression can be reversed
by PARP inhibitors since the PARP inhibitor interferes with the attraction of XRCC1 to the
break site. In vivo, PARP inhibitors improve irinotecan’s effect on human colon mouse
xenografts. 
In a mouse BRCA mutated breast xenograft, veliparib enhanced the activity of cisplatin and
carboplatin.  Older studies, too, showed the effect of PARP inhibitors on platinum
agents. In 1993, nicotinamide in combination with cisplatin increased the survival of a
cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer xenograft model.  CEP-6800 in a xenograft of non-
small cell lung cancer showed enhancement of the cytotoxic effect of cisplatin.  In
addition the alkylating agent cyclophosphamide is potentiated by veliparib.  
PARP inhibitors in combination with ionizing radiation
PARP inhibitors potentiate ionizing radiation, via the inhibition of BER, as well as possibly
through inhibition of NFκB and other inflammatory proteins and altered regulation of
cellular metabolism through AMP/ATP. PARP inhibitors preferentially sensitize cells in S-
phase. In cells that have defective PARP ability and are exposed to radiation, there is
accumulation of DSBs, revealing the conversion of SSBs to DSBs resulting from the
collapse of replication forks. PARP inhibitors increase the sensitivity of cells in growth
arrest that are otherwise resistant to radiation. One experiment showed that the latent cells
after XRT improved the growth inhibition by 73% when exposed to AG 14361.  In
addition to the accepted role of inhibiting SSBs, PARP inhibitors also inhibit DSBs. DSBs
activate PARP more potently than SSBs. Whereas 2 Zn fingers are required to attach PARP
to a SSB, only one Zn finger is required for a DSB to attach to PARP 1. Nu 1025 inhibited
the repair of DSBs after radiation, by inhibiting NHEJ. DNA-PK, a protein active in NHEJ,
may be stimulated by PARP 1. PARP 1 inhibition caused decrease in DNA-PK activity.
Recent studies show synergism between PARP inhibition and DNA-PK inhibition when
cells exposed to both were irradiated. When the NHEJ pathway is defective, PARP 1 is
recruited for DSB repair. Cells with NHEJ defectiveness that are exposed to radiation,
therefore, have heightened cell killing with PARP inhibitors. PARP inhibitors might also
enhance radiation by impairment of NF-κB. [33,100]
PARP inhibitors also augmented the effect of irradiation in vivo. in a mouse colon cancer
xenograft, the addition of veliparib to irradiation extended survival from 23 days with
radiation alone to 36 days with the combination. There was even one mouse that had a CR.
PARP inhibitors as single agent
PARP inhibition effectiveness as a single agent was first described in 2005. PARP inhibitors
killed BRCA 2 deficient cells at doses that were nontoxic to normal cells in vitro and in
xenograft models. [46,101] BRCA 2 deficient cells were found to be 90 times more sensitive
to PARP inhibition than wild type cells.  PARP inhibition in BRCA defective cells
leads to NHEJ or SSA, which cause cell arrest in G2 or M phases of the cell cycle and then
apoptosis. PARP inhibition is 3 times more potent than cisplatin cytotoxicity in BRCA
deficient cells. The PARP inhibitor Ku0058684 inhibited tumor formation in mice injected
with a BRCA 2 deficient cell line, but not in mice injected with wild type cells.  P53
(17p13.1), the tumor suppressor gene that is thought to work downstream of PARP 1 after
DNA damage, does not interfere in the cell killing by PARP inhibitors, nor does p53
mutation interfere with the effect of PARP inhibitors. [46,103] Tankyrase I inhibitor causes
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 12
chromosomal instability in BRCA1 and BRCA 2 cells, indicating that even non traditional
PARP inhibitors could be beneficial in tumor killing. 
CLINICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PARP INHIBITORS
AG 014699 (PF01367338) Pfizer
AG 014699 (the phosphate salt of AG 14361) was the first agent studied clinically in 2003
(Fig. 9). Recently at EORTC, Ihnen reported preclinical data of AGO 14699 in ovarian
cancer cell lines. The investigators evaluated 39 ovarian cancer cell lines with various
molecular expressions either with single agent AGO14699 or in combination with
carboplatin, doxorubicin, gemcitabine, paclitaxel or topotecan. They used combination
index/isobologram analysis for multiple drug effect analysis. Concentration dependent
efficacy was noted across the different cell lines to different degrees. The greatest impact
appears to be in combination with carboplatin, topotecan and doxorubicin. The BRCA status
of these cell lines was not reported. The study does suggest activity of AG014699 in ovarian
cancer and not confined to BRCA deficient tumor or high grade serous cancer. 
Plummer conducted the initial phase I report with temozolomide in solid tumors and a
subsequent phase II study was reported in melanoma patients. Overall, there was modest
activity with significant myelosuppression. AG014699 was combined with temozolomide
and both agents were given for 5 days in 28 day cycles. Temozolomide (TMZ) was started at
½ standard dose (100mg/m2) and AG014699 was escalated to PARP inhibitory dose (PID)
as evaluated from PBMCs. PID was defined as > 50% decrease in PARP activity 24 hours
after dosing. In the 17 patients in this first part of the study, no dose limiting toxicity was
seen. The PID was determined to be 12 mg/m2. At this dose there was 74–97% inhibition of
PBMC PARP. The mean terminal half life was 7.4–11.7 hours. There was linear
pharmacokinetics. The kidneys were not a major route of excretion. AG014699 did not
affect the PK for TMZ, nor did TMZ affect the PK of AG014699. The serum concentration
varied 20 fold between patients and did not correlate with concentration in the biopsies. The
PARP inhibition in the tumor correlated with dose. The drug remained in all tumor biopsies
at 5 hours after administration. PARP was inhibited for over 24 hours so the cells were
affected by the PARP inhibitor through the time they were exposed to TMZ. The PARP in
the PBMCs recovered at least 50% function by 72 hours after dosing. Four patients were
discovered to be homozygous for CYP2D6 G186A allele, known as CYP2D6 *4, which is
expected to decrease the metabolism of AG 014699. The AUC was similar for patients with
the CYP mutation compared with wild type. The toxicities in the part 1 portion of this phase
I study were mild. There was 1 case of grade 3 toxicities for fatigue, infection,
hypophosphatemia, and lymphopenia. Myelosuppression was the DLT for the highest dose
level tested of 18mg/m2 in combination with standard dose TMZ. There was a partial
response in a melanoma and a GIST patient, lasting more than 9 and 15 months. Seven
patients had stable disease at least 6 months. Four of the patients with stable disease had
melanoma, one had prostate cancer, one had pancreatic cancer, and one had
leiomyosarcoma. 
In part 2 of the phase I study, the AG014699 dose was given at the PID of 12mg/m2 and
TMZ was escalated to either MTD or standard dose of 200 mg/m2 in patients with metastatic
melanoma. Again no DLT was experienced in the15 patients. Greater than 90% PARP
inhibition was noted in PBMC. One patient with melanoma with CYP mutation had a CR
and another with melanoma and the CYP mutation had a PR. A partial response was seen in
a desmoid tumor patient previously treated. Seven additional patients had prolonged disease
stabilization (>6 months), 4 with melanoma and one each with prostate cancer, pancreatic
cancer, and leiomyosarcoma. 
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 13
The phase II study evaluated the efficacy of AG014699 at 12mg/m2 plus TMZ at 200 mg/m2
in 40 chemotherapy-naïve patients with advanced multiple melanoma. Myelosuppression
was more significant in the phase II trial than seen in the phase I trial. There were 12% grade
4 thrombocytopenia, 15% neutropenia and one death from febrile neutropenia. Twelve
patients required a dose reduction of TMZ to 150 mg/m2 and one patient required a
reduction to 100mg/m2. Fatigue and nausea also occurred. There were 4 partial responses, 4
prolonged stable diseases, and 10 patients were too early to evaluate at the time of the
report. 
There is an ongoing study evaluating AG 014699 in combination with various agents,
including carboplatin, carboplatin and paclitaxel, cisplatin and premetrexate and epirubicin
and cyclophosphamide. 
Olaparib (AZD 2281, KU-0059436) AstraZenieca
Olaparib is an oral PARP inhibitor with IC of 4.9 nM for PARP-1. It has been extensively
50
evaluated in BRCA tumors (Fig. 10). It is the first PARP inhibitor to show activity in
BRCA-related ovarian and breast cancers. It is been tested in combination with DNA
damaging agents, such as topotecan, doxorubicin, carboplatin, carboplatin and paclitaxel,
irinotecan, dacarbazine, and gemcitabine and cisplatin as well as with antiangiogenesis
agentsand as a single agent.
One of the concerns regarding the addition of PARP inhibitors to chemotherapy had been
the potential of enhancing toxicity. This is suggested with the addition of olaparib to
gemcitabine and cisplatin. In this phase I trial, olaparib was given days 1–4, cisplatin on day
3 and gemcitabine on days 3 and 10 every 21 days. Five out of six patients experienced
grade 3 or 4 thrombocytopenia. After de-escalation to dose level -1 (cisplatin 50 mg/m2 and
gemcitabine of 400 mg/m2) and still experiencing significant myelosuppression in patients,
the schedule was amended to only day 1 of olaparib. On this schedule two out of six patients
still experienced grade 3 or 4 thrombocytopenia. Two PRs were reported in one pancreatic
cancer and one NSCLC patient. The MTD was determined to be 100 mg BID of olaparib on
day 1, cisplatin 60 mg/m2 on day 1 and gemcitabine of 500 mg/m2 on day 1 and 8 on a 21
day cycle. 
BRCA-related Ovarian Cancer and Olaparib—A phase I study of single agent
olaparib, reported by Fong, enrolled 60 patients with solid tumors, including 22 BRCA
mutation patients (and another patient who refused testing but had a strong family history).
This study supported the synthetic lethality concept. Patients were treated at escalating doses
and duration. Doses of 10 mg qd 2/3 weeks to 600 mg BID continuously were evaluated.
The initial cohort were not restricted to BRCA deficient patients but was enriched for this
population. In the expansion cohort, patients had to have BRCA mutation to enroll and were
treated at 200 mg BID continuously. All of the DLTs were reversible. They included mood
alterations and fatigue in 1 of 8 patients receiving 400 mg BID and recurred when that
patient was treated with 200 mg BID. One patient out of 5 at the 600 mg BID dose level
experience grade 4 thrombocytopenia with single agent olaparib. Lastly, grade 3 somnolence
was seen in 1 patient on 600mg BID. The MTD was determined to be 400mg BID. Other
adverse events were nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dyspepsia, dysgeusia, stomatitis, altered
taste, anorexia, dizziness, and anemia. There were no increased adverse effects in BRCA
carriers compared to non BRCA carriers. Eight PRs by RECIST were seen out of the 15
patients with BRCA mutation-related advanced ovarian cancer group.All of the responses in
ovarian cancer were seen in BRCA mutated tumors. One of the 3 patients with BRCA 2
breast cancer, who had progressed while receiving anthacyclines, had a CR for over a year
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 14
after receiving olaparib. Another breast cancer patient had shrinkage of multiple
subcentimeter brain lesions that had not been treated with radiation or steroids. 
The pharmacokinetics of olaparib was measured. The concentration was linear. The peak
concentration was reached in 1–3 hours. The half life was 5–7 hours. Pharmacodynamics
was also evaluated. PARP inhibition in PBMCs, hair follicles, and tumor were all measured.
In PBMCs PARP was inhibited by 90% in patients treated with ≥ 60 mg BID. Immunoblots
of tumor showed PAR inhibition also. Hair follicles had an increase in γH2AX, measuring
DSBs, at all dose levels six hours after dosing. γH2AX remained elevated through the entire
cycle in doses ≥ 200 mg BID. 
Fong reported in 2010 a follow-up of the ovarian cancer patients on this study. A total of 50
ovarian cancer patients with BRCA mutations were enrolled. Thirty-nine were treated at the
expansion cohort dose of 200 mg BID. The rest were treated at various doses from 40 mg q
d 2/3 weeks to 600 mg BID continuously. Twenty patients (40%) had CR or PR by RECIST
and additional 3 patients had SD > 4 months (clinical benefit rate of 46%). The median
duration of response was 28 months. Seventeen patients were on treatment for greater than 6
months including a patient who had received the drug for over 2 years. The most common
drug related toxicities were mild GI symptoms and fatigue. A post ad hoc analysis of the
study showed a statistically significant relationship of response to olaparib to the period of
platinum-free interval. The response in platinum sensitive, resistant and refractory
population as determined by RECIST or GCIG was 61%, 42% and 15%, respectively. There
were no responses seen by RECIST in the refractory population vs. 46% and 33% in the
platinum sensitive and resistant populations, respectively. No differences were noted in the
duration of response or time to progression between the three platinum response groups.
 These findings suggest that resistance to platinum decreases sensitivity to this PARP
inhibitor. This correlation in tumor response to both platinum and PARP inhibitors can be
explained by resistant disease being resistant to multiple therapies. Alternatively, the
explanation might be a restoration of the HR through a second mutation to the BRCA gene,
restoring it to wildtype, and thus decreasing the sensitivity that the mutated state imparts to
platinum and PARP inhibitors. (see section Acquired Resistance to PARP Inhibitors).
Though decreased, there was significant response to olaparib even in tumors that were
resistant or refractory to platinum.
In a phase II international trial in women with confirmed BRCA 1 and BRCA 2 mutation
with recurrent and incurable ovarian cancer (ICEBERG 2), olaparib was given daily in 28
day cycle to 33 patients at 400 mg BID and to a subsequent cohort of 24 patients at 100mg
BID, a dose that had been shown previously to inhibit PARP. The RECIST ORR for the
patients receiving the 400mg dose was 33% and for the patients receiving the 100mg dose
was 12.5%. Two patients in the 400 mg cohort had complete responses and none in the
lower dose group. The clinical benefit rate (ORR and/or decrease in CA125 by ≥ 50% and
SD > 4 months) was 57.6% for the 400mg patients and 16.7% for the 100mg patients.
Toxicity was mild with only grade 3 nausea in 7% and leucopenia in 5%. This study would
imply that there might be other mechanisms causing tumor response by PARP inhibitors
since the dose that was shown to inhibit PARP was not as effective as a higher dose. 
At 35th ESMO this year, Kaye presented a randomized phase II trial of two doses of olaparib
(200 mg and 400 mg BID) vs. pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD) in patients with
BRCA mutation ovarian cancer who had recurred within 12 months of platinum-based
chemotherapy. Ninety-seven patients were accrued. The PFS were 6.5 vs. 8.8 vs. 7.1 months
for 200 mg, 400 mg and PDL arm, respectively. Olaparib did not reach the primary
objective of improving PFS partly due to a better PFS seen in the PLD arm than expected.
PRs were seen in 8/32 in the 200 mg, 10/31 in the 400 mg, and 6/33 patients in the PLD
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 15
arms. No difference in OS is seen at this time. Twice as many grade 3+ toxicities were seen
in the PLD arm. Though reported as a negative study, this trial still shows consistent
response and decreased toxicitywith the use of single agent olaparib in BRCA mutation
ovarian cancer patients. 
High Grade Serous Ovarian Cancer and Olaparib—Gelmon reported response of
high grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) in 2010 ASCO. In a multicenter study in
Canada, patients with unknown BRCA mutation status with HGSOC were given olaparib.
Biopsies were taken prior to starting treatment, after 2 cycles and at the time of progression.
Fifty-five patients were enrolled and treated with continuous dosing of olaparib 400 mg
BID. All patients agreed to BRCA testing prior to enrolling on study. There were 14 PRs out
of 53 patients (26.4 %) in the unknown group. After BRCA testing 7 patients in the
unknown group had BRCA mutations. In the 46 patients with negative BRCA mutation a
response rate of 23.9 % (11/46) was reported. There were 3/7 responses in the BRCA
mutated group. Progression free survival was 219 days in the ovarian group (17 BRCA
mutations and 46 without). The toxicities profiles were mild. Grade 3 toxicities were
reported for fatigue, anemia, diarrhea, in more than one patient. 
BRCA-related Breast Cancer and Olaprib—A proof of concept study was reported by
Tutt with single agent olaparib in patients with BRCA1 or BRCA 2 mutation breast cancer
patients. Patients all had at least one prior line of treatment for their breast cancer. Fifty-four
patients were enrolled. Patients were randomized to either 100 mg BID or 400 mg BID of
olaparib. ORR were 22% vs 41% and PFS were 3.8 vs. 5.7 months in the 100 mg vs. 400 mg
cohorts, respectively. . Median duration of response were similar in the two cohorts, ~140
days. During an interim analysis, a difference of 2.5 months was noted in the median time to
dose withdraw or dose escalation between the 100 mg and 400 mg arm. Patients in the 100
mg cohort were offered the option of having their doses escalated to the 400 mg level. There
were more grade 3+ nausea, vomiting and fatigue associated with the higher dose cohort.
This study again confirms the activity seen in the phase I trial of olaparib as a single agent in
the treatment of BRCA mutation tumors. 
Olaparib and TNBC—There was also a phase I/II combination study with paclitaxel in
TNBC. Nineteen patients were treated on the study. Fifteen of those had had prior taxane
therapy. They were given 200mg daily of Olaparib orally along with Paclitaxel 90mg/m2 IV
weekly for 3 out of 4 weeks. Thirty-seven percent of patients had confirmed PRs.
Neutropenia was the primary adverse event even with GCSF support. Given the prior taxane
exposure there is suggestion that the use of olaparib may overcome resistance to taxane.
Iniparib (BSI 201, NSC-746045; IND-71677) sanofi-aventis
Iniparib, also known as BSI 201, 4-iodo-3-nitrobenzamide, is an irreversible inhibitor of
PARP1 (Fig. 11). It is a prodrug with 4-minute half life. Data on its active metabolite is
unknown at this time though a nitroso metabolite might be one of the active metabolites.
Iniparib is given intravenously twice a week. It is the first PARP inhibitor to show survival
advantage with TNBC and has entered phase III testing.
The phase I study included 23 patients with solid tumors. The patients were escalated
through 7 dose levels up to 8 mg/kg without reaching MTD. The 1.4 mg/kg dose resulted in
a Cmax ≥ 400 ng/ml. The concentration that brought about efficacy in preclinical models
was 20–30ng/ml, so achievable levels were well over the preclinical efficacious levels. The
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 16
2.8 mg/kg dose caused PARP inhibition in PBMCs by more than 50% with the first dose.
Subsequent dosing increased the amount of PARP inhibition to more than 80%. Six of the
23 heavily pretreated patients had stable disease for at least 2 months (up to over 9 months
in one patient). The adverse events were mostly gastrointestinal. DLT was not seen. 
In another study patients with solid tumors were assigned to one of four combinations of
iniparib with a cytotoxic agent, topotecan, gemcitabine, temozolomide, or carboplatin with
taxol. Assignment to each of the 4 regimens was not randomized, but based on physician
preference. Iniparib was given on days 1 and 4 of each week. The dose of iniparib was
escalated to 8mg/kg. 55 patients have been treated on the study at the time of the report. All
regimens were reported to be well tolerated. There were no SAEs attributed to the drug. A
patient with ovarian cancer achieved a CR that lasted at least 6 months. Five patients, with
breast cancer, uterine cancer, renal cancer, and a sarcoma, achieved PRs. Nineteen patients
had SD for ≥ 2 months. 
TNBC and iniparib—In a phase II study conducted by O'Shaughnessy focusing on TNBC
randomized patients to gemcitabine with carboplatin vs. gemcitabine with carboplatin plus
iniparib. The dosing schedule was gemcitabine 1000mg/m2 and carboplatin at AUC=2 days
1 and 8 and iniparib 5.6 mg/kg days 1, 4,8,11 every 21days. One hundred and sixteen
patients were treated on the study. Updated results were reported at the 35th ESMO this year.
The clinical benefit rate (CBR) was defined as CR+PR+SD ≥ 6 months. CBR of 55.7% vs.
33.9% (p=0.015), overall response rate (ORR) of 52.5% vs. 32.5% (p=0.023), median PFS
5.9months vs. 3.6 months (p=0.012), and OS 12.3 months vs. 7.7 months (p = 0.014) in the
iniparib combination arm vs. chemotherapy arm, respectively. The p values were not
adjusted for several interim analyses. Adverse events were similar in the 2 groups. The
regimen of gemcitabine and carboplatin was not a standard regimen used in treatment of
TNBC prior to this report. The carboplatin dose was lower than standard dosing. The use of
an uncommon regimen may lead to a less effective control arm and magnify the advantage
of PARP inhibitor; however, the difference in OS does support the role of PARP inhibitor
with chemotherapy. A phase III study evaluating this combination as first to third line
treatment for metastatic TNBC has completed accrual. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) recently approved an Expanded Access Protocol (EAP) for iniparib, in metastatic
triple negative breast cancer (mTNBC).
Veliparib (ABT888) Abbott Laboratories
Preclinically veliparib was shown to be a potent inhibitor of PARP. It had good
bioavailability (Fig. 12). It crossed the blood brain barrier as seen with the PKs done in rat
brains. The addition of temozolomide did not change the PKs of veliparib. Veliparib
potentiated temozolomide, platinum agents, cyclophosphamide, and radiation in syngeneic
and xenograft tumor models. 
The first phase 0 study under FDA’s new Exploratory IND was performed by Kummar with
veliparib, ABT 888. Phase 0 studies are new mechanisms for expediting drug development.
Veliparib was chosen because it has a wide therapeutic index and a validated
pharmacodynamic assay. The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics are evaluated over a
short time period after single dose of veliparib that is thought to be nontoxic. Three dose
levels were tested, 10, 25, 50mg, each with three patients. The 10 mg starting dose was
based on 1/50 of the no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL) in the most sensitive
species, dog. The study showed that peak plasma levels occurred between 30 minutes and
1.5 hours after dosing. The target concentration based on PARP inhibition concentration in
animals was exceeded even in the patients receiving the lowest dose. The drug was primarily
renally secreted.
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 17
PAR levels were assessed in tumors and PBMCs. Statistically significant decreases in PAR
were defined to be 55% in PBMCs and 95% in tumors. Statistically significant reduction in
PAR for both tumor and PBMC was seen at 25 and 50 mg at 3–6 hours. The higher doses
were, therefore, not evaluated. However, three additional subjects at the 50 mg dose
underwent tumor biopsy around 24 hours after the administration of veliparib. PAR levels in
the tumor at 24 hours were still at least 49% below baseline levels, but only in 1 of the 3
patients was the reduction significant.
One patient at the 50 mg dose did not experience a decrease in PAR. No abnormalities in
PARP, nor poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase (PARG), the enzyme responsible for
degradation of PAR, were found to explain this phenomenon. This finding raises the
possibility of evaluating for resistance to PARP inhibitors by ex vivo screening of PBMCs.
Veliparib in combination with topotecan also showed significant myelosuppression. The
original schedule was topotean days -8 and 2–5 at 1.2 mg/m2 and veliparib 10 mg BID days
1–7. The schedule was changed to days 1–5 of topotecan when 0.9 mg/m2 of topotecan was
not tolerated. The final schedule found to be tolerable was topotecan 0.6 mg/m2 days 1–5
and veliparib 10 mg BID on day 1 only. Six out of ten patients at the higher dose levels had
significant increases in γH2AX. γH2AX was not seen with the lower doses of topotecan
alone. There was a correlation of γH2AX upregulation with PARP inhibition. (Personal
communication with Dr. Kummar)
There are multiple ongoing phase I and II trials with Veliparib as single agent and in various
chemotherapy combinations.
Ovarian Cancer and veliparib—A phase I study of veliparib in combination with
metronomic cyclophosphamide in patients with refractory solid tumors and lymphomas
registered 18 patients in 6 dose levels. Adverse events have been grade 3 and 4 lymphopenia
in 3 patients and grade 2 neutropenia in 2 patients. PBMC PAR level reductions of ≥ 50%
were seen in 16 of 18 patients. Two patients exhibited >95% reduction in PAR within the
tumors.  Two patients with BRCA 2 ovarian cancer achieved PR. Both patients
achieved PRs in the second dose level consisting of oral cyclophosphamide at 50 mg q d
days 1–21 and veliparib 30 mg q day × 7 days on a 21 day cycle. A phase II randomized trial
evaluating the role of veliparib in combination with oral cyclophosphamide in ovarian
cancer patients with BRCA mutation or high grade serous ovarian cancer will be activated in
the near future.
Breast Cancer and Veliparib—Kummar reported a PR in the phase I trial of veliparib
with oral cyclophosphamide in an ER + with BRCA 2 mutation breast cancer patient. The
patient was treated with 50 mg q d of oral cyclophosphamide and veliparib 60 mg q d oral
continuous dosing. Patient was previously treated with doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide,
letrozole, fulvestrant, gemcitabine, traztuzemab and bevacizumab. A phase II randomized
trial evaluating metronomic cyclophosphamide with or without veliparib in TNBC will be
starting soon.
Veliparib in combination with temozolomide was evaluated in metastatic breast cancer.
Forty-one patients were treated with 40 mg PO BID veliparib days 1–7 and temozolomide
150 mg/m2 days 1–5 every 28 days. The initial schedule was revised due to higher than
expected grade 4 thrombocytopenia. Veliparib was reduced to 30 mg PO BID day 1–7.
Fifteen patients had TNBC. One CR and 2 PRs were reported in 24 evaluable patients. 
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 18
MK 4827 Merck
MK 4827 is an oral PARP 1 and 2 inhibitor with IC of 3.8 nM for PARP 1. Preclincial
50
data showed single agent anti-tumor activity against BRCA mutant cell lines in culture and
xenograft models. Also, MK4827 showed activity in combination with DNA damaging
agents in cell cultures and xenograft models. It is currently being tested in phase 1
development as a single agent, in advanced solid tumors, ovarian tumors and prostate
tumors, and as combination therapy in patients with advanced solid tumors in combination
with carboplatin,carboplatin with paclitaxel, and carboplatin with liposomal doxorubicin.
MK4827 in Ovarian Cancer—At 2010 ASCO, Sandhu presented the phase I trial of
MK4827 as a single agent enriched with BRCA 1 or 2 mutation patients. An expansion
cohort of high grade serous ovarian cancer patients were added at the MTD. Seven dose
levels ranging from 30–400 mg of MK4827 were given daily for 21 days out of 28 days
initially and then on a continuous basis. Patients with prior PARP inhibitor exposure were
excluded. The preliminary PK showed a half-life of 40 hours. PARP inhibition was shown
in PBMC of patients treated with doses higher than 110 mg. The MTD was determined to be
300 mg qd. The DLT was thrombocytopenia. Eleven patients had BRCA mutations.
Nineteen ovarian cancer patients were treated in the phase I trial. Six ovarian cancer patients
achieved PR; 5 of the six patients had BRCA mutations. Responses were seen in all dose
levels. The expansion cohort in high grade serous ovarian cancer is ongoing. 
CEP 9722 and CEP 8983 Cephalon
CEP 9722 is the prodrug to CEP 8983. Preclinical evaluation of CEP 8983 in chemoresistant
glioblastoma (RG2), rhabdomyosarcoma (RH18), neuroblastoma (NB1691) and colon
carcinoma (HT29) showed the agent sensitized these cells to temozolomide and
camptothecins. In addition, using a granulocyte-macrophage colony-forming assay,
CEP-8983 did not potentiate myelotoxicity in the presence of temozolomide or topotecan.
These cytotoxic agents have been associated with significant myelosuppression when
combined with other PARP inhibitors. In animal studies, CEP 8983 increased the sensitivity
of chemoresistant tumor cells to temozolomide and irinotecan without exacerbating
myelotoxicity. CEP 9722 is being studied in a phase 1 study in solid tumors with and
without combination with temozolomide. 
BMN 673 Biomarin
LT 673 is an oral agent which the company reports to be the most potent of the PARP
inhibitors to date. It is still in preclinical development, but shows promise in mouse
xenograft models. 
BSI 401 sanofi aventis
BSI-401 is a derivative of 6-iodo-5-amino-1,2-benzopyrone, a noncovalently binding
PARP-1 inhibitor. It is an oral PARP inhibitor that may be entering clinic in the near future.
It has shown activity in orthotopic nude mouse models bearing pancreatic cells both as
single agent and in combination with oxaloplatin. Also, the study reported BSI 401 protected
the animals from oxaliplatin-induced neurotoxicity. 
ACQUIRED RESISTANCE to PARP INHIBITORS
As stated above, BRCA 2 mutated tumor cells are sensitive to platinum agents. With time,
however, they become resistant to platinum chemotherapy. Resistance has been found to
result from a secondary mutation in BRCA 2 that corrected the frameshift of the original
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 19
mutation. This finding has been confirmed to occur in patients.  Multiple clinical
disorders have been found to have the potential to revert inherited mutations to a normal
state, including, Bloom’s syndrome, epidermolysis bullosa, severe combined
immunodeficiency, tyrosinemia, Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome, and Fanconi anemia. The
mechanisms found for reversion to wild type in these genetic disorders were secondary
mutations that alter the reading frame to wild type, compensatory mutations, and crossovers.
Both a DNA damaging agent, such as cisplatin, and the BRCA 2 mutated cells, that are
defective in DNA repair, could increase the incidence of a secondary mutation. The
mutational event that converts the BRCA 2 mutation status to wild type also converts the
cells to being resistant not only to platinum agents, but also to PARP inhibitors due to
restoration of the HR pathway. BRCA 2 mutated tumors that happen to be platinum
resistant, but not on the basis of a secondary mutation converting the cells to wild type,
would be expected to retain responsiveness to PARP inhibitors. For cells that have been
converted to wild type on the basis of a second mutation, it is possible that resensitization to
PARP inhibitors could occur if another part of the HR pathway was blocked. Because
proteasome inhibitors inhibit FANCD2, 53BP1, phospho-ATM, NBS1, BRCA1, FANCD2,
and RAD51, which are all necessary in HR, proteasome inhibitors might be another option
to create “BRCAness”. [132–133]
Another mechanism of resistance to PARP inhibitors had been reported with AZ 2281. In a
genetically engineered mouse model for BRCA 1 associated breast cancer, AZ2281 was
administered over long term until resistance developed. The resistance was secondary to up-
regulation of Abcb1a/b gene encoding for P-glycoprotein efflux pump. With the
coadministration of tariquidar, P-glycoprotein inhibitor, the resistance was reversed. 
Adding another layer of complication into this system, it has recently been found that 53BP1
regulates the repair mechanism in BRCA deficient cells and, therefore, could play a role in
PARP inhibition. In a cell with normal BRCA 1 function, after a DSB, BRCA 1 displaces
53BP1 and HR repair is completed. In the case of BRCA1 mutation and absence of 53BP1,
downstream proteins of HR are still initiated and HR is still activated. It is only when BRCA
1 is mutated and 53BP1 is present that 53BP1 sticks to the site of the DSB preventing HR,
but allowing for error prone NHEJ to takeover. In BRCA-deficient mice bearing mammary
tumor, loss of 53BP1 reduced tumorgenesis. The presence of 53BP1 and BRCA 1 changes
the balance between HR and NHEJ. This would suggest PARP inhibitors would be expected
to have activity primarily in cells retaining normal 53BP1, with a greater dependence on HR
to repair DSB. Absence of 53BP1 would confer PARP inhibitor resistance. In addition, an
inhibitor of 53BP1 might decrease the tumor risk in carriers of BRCA mutations. However,
this protein is also necessary for B cell immunoglobulin switching. In addition, ATM
inhibitors might prevent BRCA mutated cells that have defective 53BP1 from maintaining
HR capability and restore synthetic lethality in the presence of PARP inhibitors to cells that
otherwise might be resistant to PARP inhibitors (Fig. 13). 
Recently 6-thioguanine (6-TG) has been found to be active in cells resistant to PARP
inhibitors. In a screen for drugs that selectively kill BRCA 2 – deficient cells, 6TG stood
out. 6-TG induces DSBs that cannot be repaired by the BRCA mutated cells. 6-TG was as
efficient as a PARP inhibitor in selectively killing BRCA 2 mutated tumor cells in a
xenograft model. 6-TG was effective against BRCA 1 defective, PARP inhibitor resistant
(PIR) tumors. The resistance was thought to be mediated through increased p-glycoprotein.
6 TG is not a substrate for p-glycoprotein so could overcome the PIR mechanism of
increased p-glycoprotein. In BRCA 2 deficient tumor cells with PIR through reactivation of
HR, the reactivated HR is not sufficient to repair the 6TG induced lesions to allow tumor
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 20
cell survival. 6 TG forms both mismatch repair-dependent and independent HR lesions. 6-
TG appears to be active in BRCA mutated cells that have acquired platinum and/or PARP
inhibitor resistance 
Discussion regarding other possible mechanisms that might allow for pathways for killing of
tumor in PARP inhibitor resistant situations have been discussed above, including triggering
other pathways that obstruct HR, inhibiting p-glycoprotein efflux, and up-regulating 53BP1.
Proteosome inhibitors, which would be expected to downregulate p-glycoprotein, also cause
degradation of 53BP1, which would allow HR to proceed in DSB repair and, by that
mechanism might not overcome resistance to PARP inhibition. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
PARP inhibitors are an exciting new class of agents that have shown efficacy, especially for
BRCA-related ovarian and breast cancer. Also, activity has been seen in both TNBC and
high grade serous ovarian cancer. There are many PARP inhibitors in development. They
vary in their route of administration, toxicity profile, efficacy and resistance mechanism.
Currently it is not clear how close the different PARP inhibitors behave clinically since few
are studied in similar conditions. To date trials have varied with respect to the type of tumors
eligible, as well as the combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy.
PARP inhibitors also work as single agents in tumors with certain DNA repair defects, using
synthetic lethality. Multiple preclinical studies have shown activity of the different PARP
inhibitors in BRCA 1 and BRCA 2 mutated tumors. Also, single agent activity has been
shown clinically in BRCA mutated tumors with olaparib and MK4827. There is interest in
exploring the activity of PARP inhibitors in cells with other DNA repair abnormalities in the
HR pathway besides BRCA 1 or 2 germline mutation,. Some of the possible HR
abnormalities include PTEN defects, Fanconi’s anemia protein defects, ATM abnormalities,
RAD51 dysfunction, EMSY defects, and TNKS abnormalities. There is a search for
biomarkers to identify tumors that are more likely to respond to PARP inhibitors, for
example the abnormalities causing HR dysfunction and gene profiling, including
microarrays that identify BRCAness. Genetic manipulation of the BRCA tumor suppressor
gene might affect prevention of tumor formation and might also augment targeted therapy.
Also screening for resistance to PARP inhibitors, for example by measuring PAR in PBMCs
ex vivo or by genome analysis, might select for patients with more susceptibility to PARP
inhibitor treatment. More investigation needs to be done regarding overcoming resistance.
The other area of significant research is the combination of PARP inhibitor with DNA
damaging chemotherapy especially those that causes SSB. The most common chemotherapy
combinations are with temozolomide, topotecan, irinotecan, and carboplatin. Also, radiation
is another area of interest since it also depends on the BER for repair. With olaparib and
veliparib, the myelosuppression seen with cisplatin/gemcitabine and topotecan, respectively,
are significantly potentiated with the addition of the PARP inhibitors. It is not clear at this
time if same dose of PARP inhibitor could be combined with different regimens of
chemotherapy. With BSI 201, same dose of BSI 201 had been used with various
chemotherapy. With veliparib this had not been the case. Also, aside from myelosuppression
is it not clear if PARP inhibitors potentiate other toxicities. Data with BSI 401 suggest some
toxicities may be improved with the addition of PARP inhibitors. This area would also
benefit from additional research. An agent, like BSI 401, that will alleviate neuropathy and
potentially increase cytotoxicity, would be a great addition to the oncologic therapeutic
arena. This will need to be evaluated clinically.
Additional areas of research include other enzymes PARP inhibitors might affect by their
action on the NAD+ site, which is present in other enzymes. In the olaparib single agent
Curr Probl Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 1.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Weil and Chen Page 21
study, 100 mg was not as efficacious as the 400 mg dose. From the report 100 mg of
olaparib inhibited PARP. This finding suggests that other mechanisms of action may be
responsible for the difference in activity between the two dose levels. Also, PARP 1 leads to
down regulation of mTORC and to autophagy as part of the cellular metabolic regulation.
PARP inhibitors may cause decreased autophagy and overall cellular dysregulation. This
nonspecific aspect of PARP inhibitors could be a road to untoward side effects not yet
recognized.
As this class of agents moves into the (neo)adjuvant and prevention setting, caution should
be raised regarding secondary malignancy. PARP repairs DNA mutations which occur daily.
By inhibiting PARP long term, inability to repair a normal process may lead to malignancy
similar to a BRCA carrier. The late effects of being treated with PARP inhibitors will only
become known over time.
This is an exciting new class of agents that has many areas of development and potential.
Over the next few years, current studies answering many of the above questions will mature
leading to better understanding of the PARP inhibitors and additional use for these agents. It
may also lead to FDA approval of one or more of these agents for use in the treatment of
breast, ovarian and other cancers.